[music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLotss podcast. I'm Jill
Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy [music] Aloway.
>> Do you think you and I are going to
start getting checks because they struck
down the tariffs? Right. And according
to economists, consumers pay the tariff.
So if consumers pay the tariffs and they
strike down the refund, shouldn't we get
the money?
>> I have often said, Joe, I buy a lot of
stuff. Yeah. Especially from abroad, a
lot of weird stuff. Sometimes I feel
like I'm running a small logistics
company. And I will say, so I know it's
the importer of record who actually pays
the tariffs and is supposedly supposed
to get the refund. However, I've had a
few instances where like the postal
service will deliver something to my
house, especially in Connecticut, and
while they're there, we'll say, "You owe
us like $50 in cash as a tariff
payment." And I'm literally standing on
my door
>> really
>> paying out cash and it's going
somewhere. So, I feel very much like I
actually have paid the tariffs pretty
much directly to the Trump government.
Like, there is something very visceral.
>> I have some bad news to
>> I know. I know. The person who did that
was a con artist who showed up and they
said and they they duped you into
thinking that because I have never heard
of someone having to pay cash.
>> You're not buy you're not buying enough
from abroad. No, it's definitely true. I
got the bill online and then you can
either pay online or you can pay the
postal guy in cash. It's very strange.
>> I've never heard of that. Anyway,
everyone wants their money back. How
that's going to happen? What the time
frame is? There's going to be major
court fights. There was an article in
the Wall Street Journal this morning and
it said that the scale of the suits to
recover it is going to be quote the same
level is at isbestous levels which
famously was you know multiple decades
of lawsuits
>> also gave birth to an entire portion of
the legal industry lots of messtheloma
lawyers out there
>> some time later I'll tell you I was
briefly part of that industry as a data
collector for it that's interesting
>> yeah it's fun anyway we got to figure
out how it's all going to happen because
we know all these big companies they
want their money back. Of course, you
know, there's new tariffs already in the
like the Trump administration after
losing one tariffs, they're like putting
in a different one that's probably going
to have court fights, etc. We also know
that there was a popular secondary
market in claims that Wall Street banks
were facilitating. And so, this is going
to be a mess. It's probably going to
stand for years. We got to figure out
how companies are actually in the
process of get getting their money back
and whether they'll ever see it or
whether it all go to the lawyers.
>> Well, this is the other thing. I know
you and I live in perpetual fear of
paperwork and bureaucracy and this in
particular just strikes me as like the
biggest nightmare of paperwork and
bureaucracy.
>> I hate that.
>> You know, for some of the tariffs you're
like calculating them by like the
proportion of like the tariff item in
the thing you're buying. So like steel
and aluminum, how much of this thing is
actually steel? It just seems like a
nightmare. The whole thing of customs
seems like a nightmare. Still very
antiquated. We got to learn more about
this nightmare, about this chaos. And
who do we talk to when we want to learn
more about not the theoretical stuff
that about trade that, you know,
economists talk to talk about, which I
love them too, but the actual nuts and
bolts of moving things of course uh
perfect guest Ryan Peterson, founder and
CEO of Flexport, joins us today. So
Ryan, thanks for coming back on Odd
Outlaws. It
>> is great to be with you. And Tracy, that
person may have been an impersonator of
a postman, but it is illegal to
impersonate a postman. I tried to be one
for Halloween and you can't buy a
postman's outfit. I had to borrow one.
>> I made friends with the mailman and he
gave me his to borrow, but he was like,
I will get fired if anyone finds out.
>> Guys, I'm just going to be very clear.
It wasn't a scam. The guy had my
package. I had the bill. I've received
the package. Customs isn't going after
me for unpaid bills. It's just weird.
It's weird. But I think it speaks to
like a lot of Americans will feel like
they have paid these tariffs extremely
directly.
>> All right, Ryan, let's just start big
picture. You work with a lot of
companies, etc. February 26, what are
they all up to right now?
>> Everybody wants to figure out if they're
going to get a refund. That's the big
question. And if so, when and how? and
my ad what we've been telling. So
Flexport is a one of the bigger customs
brokers in the United States and and I
think the most automated one the best
systems for calculating this stuff and
all that. That's my the only sales pitch
I'll do here. But the um
>> it's allowed.
>> So that is the giant question. And then
they also want to know hey can I sell
this now? You know, you mentioned the
secondary market that the very
interesting fact fun fact there is that
that was those were trading at about 25
cents on the dollar
>> three weeks ago and it went to 52 cents
on the dollar on Friday the same day of
the Supreme Court. Markets move very
fast on this stuff. So, a lot of the
companies I talked to in the last week
have said the CEOs had said, "Yeah, they
would sell at 70 cents on the dollar
today and they're considering it at 52
cents." So, I think that market's really
going to heat up. Um, but yeah, those
are the big questions to ask and I do
have opinions. I think I believe I have
a very high degree of certainty like
bordering on certainty, conviction
bordering on certainty that there will
be refunds and I don't think it's going
to take that long. I think you're going
to see refunds this year would be I'm
going to put my name put my reputation
on the line with that prediction.
>> Well, okay. So, the Supreme Court
>> Not for you, Tracy. Sorry. I don't know
how
I've already resigned myself. I need to
hire a customs broker actually is what I
need to do. Someone like Ryan. But okay,
so the Supreme Court struck down the
majority of the tariffs, but the thing
they didn't do is say like what happens
next? How do refunds actually work? Do
you get a sense of like did they have
any idea of how it should work that they
just didn't say or like they're just
leaving it open to who exactly to decide
the process of how this actually
happens?
>> Yeah. So, a little backgrounds here. So
this started in as a case in the court
of international trade which the
administration lost. It then went to the
appellet court which is the level below
the Supreme Court in the appeal there at
the appellet court. The plaintiff this
company called Voss Voss something I
forget I should have but there the
plaintiff is a small business that was
suing and they actually asked for a stay
an administrative injunction a stay to
say hey you have to stop collecting
these tariffs while this gets worked
through. You lost the case you need to
stop now. And the DOJ in that appellet
court filed a motion that said if we
lose this case, if the government lose
this case, there will be refunds. Like
that's from the DOJ. They filed the
motion. You can read it in the docket.
They then lost the case there. It went
to the Supreme Court. They lost again.
>> The Supreme Court has sent it back down
to the original first court, the Court
of International Trade, and said, "Okay,
you decide if there's, you know, how the
refunds are going to." They didn't say
anything about refunds. It just goes
back to them.
It it's just if you read the thing and
I'm not a lawyer, okay, but I can read
it and I make my own opinion. But the
more the reason I really have certainty
is I've talked to three different
international trade attorneys who all
told me 100% certainty that there would
be refunds. And I've never heard a
lawyer say 100% certainty of anything
before in my whole life. So, by the way,
the company that filed I'm looking it
up, Voss Selections, it's a it's a wine
importer in uh in New York. It looks
like they have a really nice website.
Their website is very funny because it
has all these beautiful pictures and it
says wines and then saki and other
spirits and then there's a big thing
called fighting the tariffs. It sort of
looks ugly on their website.
>> That's epic. I got to buy some wine from
this guy.
>> They've done everyone a big solid here
by taking this on.
>> That's a future OddLots guest right
there with this case to talk about it.
>> This court of trade, it's not like some
UN court. It's a New Yorkbased US court.
>> Yeah.
>> It sounds like it would be like the WTO
or something like that, but this is a
local
>> No. No. It's a US court where they send
these types of cases. In fact, there was
another case that was brought in the DC
circuit case, six circuit court, and
they bundled them together into the
court of international trade. Now,
currently, there are over 2,000 cases
before the courts before the court
challenging AIPA, sorry, requesting
refunds, effective challenging that they
should get a refund. So, I think those
will likely all get rolled into one and
it'll go to court. Now, the Court of
International Trade has only 30 days
from February 20th was when the Supreme
Court came out and they have 30 days to
to make a ruling of what happens next.
So, I think we're going to know pretty
quick how the refunds, you know, that
there will be refunds. Just to be clear,
is part of the reason that there is this
confidence, I mean, the law is the law,
I guess, but is because of that DOJ
comment prior to the Supreme Court
pre-indicating that if you guys reverse
this, we're going to have to make
refunds. Is it is that part of the
reason that the lawyers have such
confidence because they've already
stated that as part of their arguments
against striking down?
>> Exly. I mean, just think about, look,
I'm not a lawyer and you're always going
to find some lawyers that will show some
gray area, but I've talked to three that
had just pure certainty and you know,
just imagine that you're going back to
the same judge and you're saying, hey,
>> you know, you're trying to fight the
refunds and your judge is going to go
like, well, you filed this paper, you
know, this motion in my court that said
you would give a refund if you lost.
Like, why are you not honoring that
saying? So,
>> but there's there's complexities here.
I'm not a legal expert. I'm more of a
customs tariffs expert. So,
>> so maybe before we go any further, let's
just talk about who actually is paying
the tariffs when like, you know, an item
gets made abroad and then it gets
imported by, I don't know, a shipping
company and then it goes through a
customs broker and then it actually ends
up at a store and then it gets bought by
whoever. Who is the entity that is
actually paying the tariff? So, the
importer of record that supposedly is
going to get this refund. Yeah, it is
that's the legal term for it is the
importer of record and it's generally a
US business. In your case, you did it as
an individual. You may or may not have
been the importer of record on that
transaction.
>> Yeah, I'm pretty sure it was like the
actual shipping company, but whatever.
>> And with small parcel, that was that's
what happened. And that's very relevant
because FedEx this week sued the
government for a refund. And my initial
reaction was like, wait, I don't
understand. Like FedEx doesn't pay the
tariffs. Their customers do. But it
turns out for a small parcel, what I
didn't I'm not in the small partial
business, small parcel business, so I
didn't realize this really, but is that
if you're getting a parcel delivered,
although you are sent a tariff bill by
FedEx, FedEx is the importer of record,
they pay the tariff. So the refund comes
to them,
>> they don't have to give it to you
legally until they'll probably get class
action lawsuit by a bunch of Tracy's and
your friends and everybody else out
there. or you know it's also just brand
damage if they don't if they get the
money from the government and don't do
it I don't know it seems like a bad look
so that's the case of small parcel in
you're importing containers that's the
business that we're in ship large volume
stuff the importer of record is is a US
entity but it doesn't have to be in in
actually United States UK Hong Kong are
the only countries in the world if we
want to count Hong Kong as a country the
only places in the world that allow
non-resident importers so it's a foreign
importer of record until April of last
year that was about 9% of US trade since
April it went to 20%. Uh it's been an
explosion of companies 11% of trade
flipped to where the foreign company
imports it and so actually about 20% of
the refunds I don't know in dollar value
but 20% of the companies getting a
refund will be foreign companies and
that nothing is going to piss Trump off
worse than that. We're literally going
to wire this money overseas. Can you
explain what changed since liberation
day such that it made sense for a lot of
foreign companies to establish
themselves as importers in the US?
>> Yeah. So what what changed was a massive
incentive to commit fraud. And if you're
a US company that was buying goods from
overseas, you have to pay the tariffs,
right? And you you declare your goods,
you pay the tariff as a percent of the
value of those goods. If instead you
say, "Hey, I'm just going to buy the
goods in the United States from my
factory
and they'll take care of the tariffs and
that foreign company can just undervalue
the goods and say, "Hey, this thing that
you know, it's actually only $10,000."
>> Oh,
>> not a h 100,000. And you just reduce
your duties by 90%.
>> Oh,
>> and the US companies are doing this in
mass and washing their hands and saying,
"Hey, I you know, I didn't know any
better. I didn't know they I don't see
any of that. I'm just buying the goods
from this foreign company and it's not
my problem. And so we've seen a huge
explosion of that. And all those people
are not those US companies, by the way,
they don't import anything. So they're
not getting any refunds at all. And I
don't feel bad for them. [laughter]
>> Uh yeah, you got to imagine when you
have something like these tariffs come
into play, you're going to see some
creative work creative, you know, with
for listeners with air quotes around
there.
>> Yeah. And where we started, Tracy, was
you were talking about an individual
case where you actually bought something
from abroad. But of course, the massive
things is, hey, you just buy it
domestically from a company. They did
raise their prices for the tariffs in a
lot of cases.
>> They're you're not going to get any
refunds. But the really interesting
shakeddown that's happening
>> is, okay, let's say you actually are a
wholesaler and you sell to Walmart,
Target, these types. Your tariffs went
up, you raised prices.
Walmart. I talked to a company last
night who's a big seller on Walmart,
wholesaler to Walmart, and they said
Monday morning Walmart called and said,
"Hey, we need to talk about this tariff
refund."
>> Oh.
>> And how we're going to get
>> because they, you know, they don't have
a legal obligation to give money to
Walmart, but Walmart also doesn't have a
legal obligation to keep carrying their
product in the stores,
>> right? So, there's some influence they
could exert. Actually, this reminds me.
So, one of the things I was wondering,
and again, this comes from my personal
capacity of bringing strange items into
the US, but I bought like an antique box
recently, and antiques I'm pretty sure
are supposed to be exempt from the
tariffs. But I still got slapped with a
tariff charge because the exporter, the
person sending it to me, did not label
it as an antique. They labeled it as
box, which [laughter] was very, it was a
box within a box. It was very annoying.
And so, it got a big tariff. How much
flexibility do importers in the US have
over like the actual labeling of the
items that they're bringing into the US?
Is that one way that you could
potentially, you know, try to lower your
your tariff burden?
>> Fraud advice from Peterson.
>> It is it is uh it is illegal. So you you
each product has one and only one
harmonized classification. We call it
harmonized schedule code. It's a
classification. That said, it is not
always obvious at what the right one
should be and there's a whole art of
classification. It's a very difficult
and it but it's illegal to choose your
classification based on duty rate.
>> You know, you got to choose it based on
what's correct. Now, if the correct duty
rate should happen to be lower than the
incorrect one, then you're doing a great
job at life. And so, that's a whole
that's a whole art and science is how do
you make the case prove it that you that
you did in fact get the right HS code
classification.
I want to talk more obviously about the
logistics of the next several weeks and
months about how this is going to be,
but just in terms of maybe not
necessarily fraud per se, although that
was very interesting. What else have you
seen basically since last April in terms
of companies rerouting any of their, you
know, what are the big trends in terms
of restructuring the direction of the
supply chain? Because part of the
question to my mind is going to be with
ongoing uncertainty about the future of
tariffs and there's already a new tariff
and Trump may try to restore the old
tariffs in aggregate through other means
and so forth. Have there been changes in
trade flows that you expect companies
are just going to keep because at this
point this is the new normal and it's
not sort of worth going back.
>> For sure. Lots of manufacturing has been
moving towards Southeast Asia and Latin
America kind of the two big winners.
Turkey a few other locations where
you're seeing stuff that can shift move.
I I think the most interesting and not
immediately obvious, the most
interesting trend has been that it's
actually in many cases Chinese companies
setting up factories in these countries.
And so it's like literally you're
working with the same company you worked
with before and they've cloned the line.
In many case, they've sent Chinese
workers to manage the line.
>> Yeah.
>> And so it's not that as far as the money
flows, like it's still kind of going
straight back to China. In a lot of
those cases, people are frustrated
because the quality is just a lot worse.
It's not easy to just pick up shop and
move the manufacturing. I mean, you're
just adding layers of cost here. And a
lot of what's happening is in order to
change the the country of origin.
>> It's not just you can't just ship it to
that country and then ship it to the US.
That would be called trans shshipment.
And the US, one of these recent
executive orders did this like new
tariffs on trans shipments. But it was
just a ridiculous concept that shows
that the government doesn't understand
their own rules because if you just ship
it to Vietnam and then ship it to the
United States, it's still a product of
China. So there's no tariff on trans
shipments. It's just the tariff on the
Chinese goods. So that that law was
nonsens that executive order was totally
nonsensical. You have to actually create
and show that you have trans it's called
substantial transformation. You have to
show that like okay I've assembled
products in this country. I've added
enough value whether it's through labor
or other components to make it a product
of Vietnam. But of course by definition
that's just adding costs and then
transit times too because Vietnam is
further away than China. There are less
direct ocean sailings etc. So it's been
very difficult for people to navigate.
We've I said that would be my last sales
pitch earlier, but we do have a free
tool for this as well. It's at
atlas.flexport.com. You can see the tra
transit time between any two ports in
the world like the actual like how it
moves. So, this has been quite helpful
for people to go navigate. Uh, and
tariffs.flexport.com helps you see what
the tariff rate is.
>> Always be pitching, right? Code.
>> It's fine.
>> They're free tools, so I don't feel like
I'm trying to audience.
>> So, one of the reasons the story is so
interesting is obviously there's a
logistical element. There's an economics
element, but there's also this political
element. I feel like all of economics
nowadays is pretty political. But in any
case, you know, Trump has said that the
American consumer doesn't pay the tariff
and yet it seems we are very much about
to talk a whole lot about how much money
American consumers might be owed from
tariff refunds. Do you get the sense
that any companies are sort of caught
between a rock and a hard place where
you know like maybe they would like to
pay out some of their refund to their
customers, but at the same time they
also don't want to make huge
announcements about returning money that
Trump says was never taken away in the
first place.
>> Yeah, I mean it's definitely those the
FedEx, UPS, DHLs of the world that are
in that condition. I USPS will be an
interesting one. I'm not sure if, you
know, it'd be interesting to go look at
those parcels he didn't see. Was it
actually USPS or was it FedEx? Because
if it was USPS,
>> presumably you are the import of record,
but maybe it's USPS. That would be a
kind of a crazy case actually if USPS
doesn't give back the money that they
charged you. That would be a great class
action.
>> Yeah, those are probably the one. But
it's really just like a brand and
business question more so than a legal
one. I think
>> maybe they want to piss off the Trump
administration. By the way, I might just
spend the rest of this conversation only
half paying attention because I'm now
playing a playing at atlas.flexport.com.
It's really cool like clicking all these
ports and seeing all the routes and
seeing how long it typically takes from
one route to another.
>> Like
>> I know it's amazing.
>> I think you've done a is very helpful.
This is really fun website you you
built.
>> Global trade has been this mysterious
black box for centuries and now you can
just see how it actually works. Where do
the ships go? It's like the bus routes,
you know, what's what ports do they stop
at? How long do they take?
>> No, this is a really fun uh website. So,
thank you for plugging it. So, okay,
tell us actually about I guess because
you're you're highly automated and
digital, etc., do all companies have
really good records on this stuff? Is it
very clear just from a sort of over the
last year? Would you say the vast
majority of companies know exactly how
much they've paid unambiguously?
I would say they do not, but they can
very easily. So the US customs
technology system is called ACE
automated commercial environment and
customs brokers love to complain about
this. It's like healthcare.gov like
times a million in terms of debacle of
engineering problem but it works. It
took them like a decade longer than it
should have to launch the thing. And you
can every importer that does entries
like commercial customs entries not the
Tracies of the world shipping a package
to themselves but like real customs
entries of of formal entry. All those
entries are available to you. So you can
see your past history. You have to just
go to and you have to have an ACE
account. If you don't, you got to go
create one. And if you want a refund,
you must have an ACE account. They've
until about two months ago, no, until
February 6th, all refunds were done via
paper checks from the Treasury
Department from customs. And we Plexport
has gotten over $900 million worth of
refunds for our customers in the last 5
years from customs. One of my most proud
life achievements. And all of those came
via paper checks. Many of them got lost
in the mail. Some of them got cashed by
scammers, etc. So, this was on February
6. They updated so that now refunds will
be electronic, which was actually maybe
a sign that they kind of had a sense of
what was here to come. But yes, your ACE
account does show you your entire past
history of all your imports. And if you
go to tariffs.flexboard.com at the top,
you can upload that and we will just
show you exactly how much money you're
owed. And we got about 70 Fortune 500
companies signed up in the last week.
>> Wow. starting to calculate these tariffs
and CFOs are coming to look as again
it's a free service you can just go look
up your tariff refunds.
>> Do you get any sense from your clients
of you know I I'm pretty sure they're
excited about potential refunds but do
you get any sense of what they're going
to do with them? Is it just you know
fill the hole that was left from paying
the tariffs in the first place or does
this count as like a windfall payment
that they could potentially hold on to
and use to invest or whatever? Yeah,
these are uh sick and demented people
who have an addiction to just buying
inventory and they're going to just buy
a lot more stuff and try to grow their
business. No, I'm joking. But I assume
that that's what'll happen is you
everyone's an optimist. You get a lot of
money. Most lottery winners go broke.
Although that might not be it might be
an urban legend, but I think they will
go reinvest in their business in ways
that may not make sense. And I've been
advising people, you know, keep put it
in your bank account, buy something, you
know,
>> save it for the next round of tariffs
presumably. So this is a So this is
actually what I was going to ask which
is so already there's this new 10%
tariff. One of the things I think I saw
was that in his latest truth social post
he said 15%. But that actually it's 10
like the actual formal thing is 10%.
What is the current state of tariffs as
you see them?
>> It's currently 10% that section 122 is
10%. They was a legal limit of 15 and
that's what he did the next day. First,
he announced 10 on Friday after the
Supreme Court, like an hour or two
after, then the next day on Saturday
went to 15. I thought he was going to
wait at least until the hockey gold
medal match and just like if Canada won
then put the 15% in, but like he jumped
the gun on that.
>> But did he put the 15% on cuz what is
the ter?
>> He did, but he did it via I think Truth
Social or some other post. That's not
how the laws work. So, you have to
actually publish it through the Code of
Federal Regulations and they haven't
done that yet. So, we're waiting for
like official word, which you know,
usually it's a couple of days lag from
when he says something. So, it's still
10% as of today, but I would expect, you
know, maybe by the time this episode
airs it goes to 15.
>> Tracy, did you know, speaking of the gap
between announcement and formal thing
that technically Kevin Worsh hasn't been
nominated yet? Because there's a part he
has like send it to it hasn't been sent
and his odds on Poly Market were at 99%
the day after the announcement and
they're now like 96%. So people are
wondering what's up with Anyway, just
throwing that out there.
>> I should just say we're recording this
on February 26 because again all of this
stuff seems to change day by day if not
hour by hour. So that's the discuss
>> it's very fluid and the the section 122.
It's the section 122 of the trade act of
1974. And that's what gives the that's
one of the several tools. I I would say
that Trump probably he lost AIPA in the
Supreme Court. He has at least four
other acts of Congress that have
delegated trade a tariff authority to
the president under certain conditions.
I was the one that they never been used
before for tariffs always for sanctions
and b outright bans and on trade that
the reason they liked it it was under
their interpretation. It gave them
blanket authority just to do what they
wanted whenever they wanted on demand.
like he could just wake up in the
morning and just like you get a terror
if you know you look at him the wrong
way and you get a terror.
>> That seems like it was in Switzerland
specifically, right? Didn't he say
specifically he was just annoyed but or
>> I forgot. Yeah, I wouldn't surprise
>> what you're describing was not actually
a hypothetical.
>> No, I mean that was basically what he
was doing Canada a couple of times etc.
So the other ones require they have much
more formal mechanisms that will require
like the commerce department or USR to
do some re you know do something and go
run a report go demonstrate that in fact
this country and this sector are being
anti-competitive and they're doing
something and then punish them. Now 122
is the one that he put in. It has
relatively blanket authority but it has
a it has two limits on it. One is that
it's a maximum of 15% which we just
talked about and the other is that it's
a maximum of 150 days and that'll go
until July 20th of this year. And so
then what you should expect is like
between now and July 20th that he was
he'll be using these other mechanisms of
which there's section 301 that's the
famous China tariffs from his first term
were section 301 tariffs. Those have not
been challenged. He's been able to
maintain those and then section 232 and
232 is on national security grounds.
That's what the steel and aluminum
tariffs have come in on. They that's not
getting challenged or if it has they won
the case or will win the case. It's
reasonable to say that steel and
aluminum are na important national from
a national security perspective.
However, he also used section 232 to
impose furniture tariffs on national
security grounds. And I think that's a
little bit of a stretch. Personally,
>> couches, comfy couches are a security
issue. I would argue. I imagine on July
20th what's going to happen is we'll
have like a one day tariff jubilee or a
15minute tariff jubilee and then they
just get re-extended for another 120
days. Right.
>> That was my prediction. I think I talked
to a couple trade lawyers about that
prediction and they told me that yes he
might do that but there's no way that
that would hold up in a court. So
>> Oh interesting. Okay.
>> It's one thing what Trump does versus
what a court finds to be legal. We we'll
find them
[music]
going back to the way these tariffs were
originally described by the
administration. The whole idea was
bringing jobs and industry back to
America. And like some of the
justification seems to have morphed
since then. At the State of the Union
address, Trump was talking, I think,
about how he used tariffs as like a tool
of political power to influence
countries and get them to do other stuff
that he wanted. But again, when you look
at your customers, do you get the sense
that these tariffs have been successful
in their original goal in shifting
economic activity back to America?
>> It's a little hard to parse out. I mean,
like a lot of our customers are
importing goods, so they're not the
ones. The exporters, you know, I've met
as many companies that export that said
that these tariffs actually hurt them
because they import components,
>> right?
>> And it makes it uncompetitive. You
import a component, you got to pay a
duty on it. And if they were to put that
factory in Mexico, they wouldn't pay the
same duty. They could import the goods.
And then if they're if they're selling
in the US, fine. It's like one way or
the other, it's the same. But if you're
selling it into Europe or you're
shipping it abroad, then it really makes
that manufacturing less competitive.
It's probably a little hard to parse out
though because we we're going through
this incredible AI capex buildout that
you know there's a lot of
industrialization happening. A lot of a
lot of stuff like in general in
theoretical grounds like tariffs are
good for manufacturing in purely
economic theoretical
world but these things are like I think
much too complex to be centrally managed
by the state is like the great lesson of
the last century.
>> I do think the point about tariffing
imported components for you know because
we don't in theory we don't want to just
build stuff here. We want to build
complex highv value ads
>> and then sell it to other people
>> and sell it supposedly. But yeah, if
your input costs go up because here's
this one piece of metal or whatever it
is, then that does uh make the cost of
doing business higher in the United
States. But on the AI, I'm curious just
setting aside all the tariffs since you
brought up the AI boom that's creating
its new different trade flows,
incredible imports from Korea, right,
for memory chips. So those prices are
going insane. And I think I saw a stat
just uh the pure level of importing that
we're doing from Taiwan uh is just
staggering all because of chips etc. But
what else are you seeing interesting in
terms of trade flows because of all this
AI activity that's going on or do you
see any fingerprints of that? Yeah, you
see a lot in the air freight market
especially because the one of the Trump
administration crackdowns was the end of
dimminimous shipping which was if you
ship something less than $800 you didn't
have to pay customs duties on it and
that was just this huge boom it had been
50% of the world's air freight and so
when that ended back in I think it was
in May for China they stopped they ended
that program all the experts including
me went on the record and said hey the
price of air freight is going to
collapse because it's 50% of the world's
air freight is dimmin ous shipments from
Asia, from China mostly and that's all
going away and so the price going to
collapse. Well, it turns out price of
air freight has stayed sta stable stayed
high because there's so much so many
components for data center buildouts
getting flown around the world. It's
more than made up for the drop from the
dimminimous shipping. that dimminimous
exception, the 800 exception, that
always reminds me of, you know, the
charts that you see of men's like
self-reported heights where like no one
is 5'8 or 5'9. Everyone is either like
shorter or 510 and above. Like all the
shipments were either, you know, like
less than 800 or a lot more than 800 and
like nothing just around there.
>> What happened though? Cuz I thought they
were going to kill like Shien and Timu
and some of these things with the
dimminimous stuff. Did any what happened
with those businesses?
>> Those guys are actually do they're doing
pretty well. It turns out it wasn't just
tariff arbitrage. So that's also part of
the story on the air freight market that
we got wrong is like they're doing okay.
And that one thing they've set up
fulfillment centers in the US. They've
set up some pretty big automated
networks that probably like 20% of the
size of Amazon's network now is these
fulfillment centers for Chinese ecom run
by Chinese e-commerce companies. is
really a massive kind of an under
reportported thing there. And they're
also they're still flying it from China.
They're paying the duties. One of the
most interesting facts I learned this
year actually is that Sheen does they 40
billion of sales 40 billion of revenue
last year and no purchase order that was
made from Sheen to its factories was
more than 200 items.
>> So you're talking like tens of millions
of little tiny granular purchases. And
that means they never have to discount
because they don't keep much stock.
>> You know, they only have 200 of each
thing. Whereas if you go to like a lot
of websites are like retail stores are
always running a sale because they got
too they bought too much stuff and
they're dumping it. So the business
model actually has some attractive
features for it. And um I had we had
started to build that service. We were
offering it for a lot of we do still
offer a similar service where we can
ship from overseas and then we'll just
inject it directly to the postal service
or other last mile carriers. We stopped
investing there because I was like this
is going to die with the end of
dimminimus but probably a mistake in
hindsight. we're seeing like actually
that model is still working. So
>> actually that reminds me when you look
back at gosh I can't believe it's only
been like a year basically. But when you
look back at the past year and your
customers what was the biggest
differentiating factor between those who
handled the tariffs well and those who
didn't? Was it just like size and their
ability to squeeze out concessions from
suppliers or was it I don't know data
records and really good lawyers I guess.
What did you see that made a particular
company handle this better than others?
>> Yeah, I mean you have to look probably
within an industry because they're
certain industries are just have
sectoral advantages or disadvantages
like it's hard to move electronics out
of China. Um and then some of those
industries were exempted from the
tariffs. Actually, you know who did the
best was the guys who went to uh managed
to get a meeting at the White House and
shake hands and convince them, you know,
like Apple don't tax don't tariff the
iPhone. Um, but that was a very
privileged small number of people that
had that kind of access. But smaller,
all other things being equal, I think
that like more entrepreneurial companies
that could just move quickly and make
good decisions and just like, all right,
cool. We're going to set up
manufacturing in Mexico or Latin America
or some of these places and actually
move relatively quickly. But it's not
just speed. You got to make good
decisions. You know, like people who
moved to India in a hurry and then found
out India got hit with a 50% tariff like
not doing that great. So maybe some of
it's just luck too. I mean, it's very
hard to forecast how the
>> how this thing would did play out and
what's going to happen next is kind of
anybody's guess. So sometimes the best
thing to do is nothing and just let
things go stable. I met a couple of
companies that said that was their plan
and I was like that's kind of bold and I
like it on some level. So okay, you're
fairly optimistic that this is not going
to take as long as perhaps some people
think, but what is what are companies
doing right now? walk us through the
actual nuts and bolts of getting the
refunds and what's happening right now
and how the timeline works and what they
have to do to actually get them and so
forth. Walk us through that.
>> It it's a bit of a technical thing, but
you guys have a nerdy audience. So, I
think the way that it'll work, it's
there's first of all, there's some
uncertainty of how the timing is going
to work. If there are refunds at all,
it's still not guaranteed, although I
feel pretty high certainty. The way that
it's likely to work is you're going to
need to pull that ACE report that was I
was talking about earlier. pull it from
customs, calculate how much you're owed.
You then are going to need to file, it's
unclear if you'll need to file protest.
Typically, the way that it works to get
a refund is you go, you file a protest.
You make your case to the government
that, hey, we've got this mclassified.
We are protesting and we and you'll get
a refund. That's typically how it works.
And that's how we're set up to go do
that is go file these protests on your
behalf to go challenge the AIPA protest
and say, "Hey, you never should have
paid me this." and I'll get a refund.
So, we're putting that program in place
right now for companies to go just make
that easy, take away the paperwork. The
piece that's a little bit more
sophisticated is where people are
selling these things in the secondary
market that I mentioned earlier. So,
there's at least three big banks that
are out there. I don't know if they're
big, but there are three groups that are
out there, at least three. There's
probably more
>> that are buying these things. And like I
said, the market price went to 52%. So,
there's a lot of negotiating right now
of going, "All right, what's this time
value of money? what's the what's your
relative certainty of when and how this
is going to play out. That's a market
that I'm tracking very closely. Thus
far, those guys have only transacted
where company's refund is at least $10
million. One of the things I would like
to be able to do is say, "Hey, we can
pull a bunch of these guys together." Do
any of the bank have any of the banks
come to you and said like rather than
trying to ga gather all of these you
know tens of thousand however hundreds
of thousands of companies did they just
come to any of the freight brokers and
say like assemble your crew and we like
do a batch a batch sale.
>> Yeah. Until last Friday we have we've
talked to all of them. Until last Friday
there was just a little too much
uncertainty for us to put in the effort
and like to build the thing. We built a
calculator. that's why we were able to
go live with the calculator, you know,
the same day as the refunds went live
because we'd been building that. Um, but
as far as the processing, we didn't
really invest in building that
capability until Friday. We kicked off
those, you know, like in earnest. So,
that's what I'm hoping to be able to
build in a hurry. Uh, I really like to
be able to pull these things and I've
talked to so many companies that said,
"Hey, if you could get me 70%, I would
60% even, I would do it tomorrow." So
that would be I think we could I think
that we could create a lot of value
there for everybody. I mean I think my
estimate is much higher than 60%. So
there's
>> if I value the thing differently than
you are, there should be a win-win.
>> Well, this is what I was going to ask.
So just to be clear, like those claims
on tariff refunds are trading at 50 or
60% at the moment, but we are expecting
the full refund amount to actually come
back, right? There's not plus legal
fees, I think.
Uh well I don't know about legal fees
but plus interest you're supposed to get
six I think 6% is the current rate on
that 6% annualized. So yeah that when
now we say we are expecting that's me
and my team and some lawyers I've talked
to but the brands probably aren't
expecting it that high or else they
wouldn't sell it for 60% or they need
the money right now.
>> The justification for not getting the
full refund if they're illegal like the
totality is illegal right?
>> Well this the full refund would come but
in that case they would go to the person
who bought it from you not you. So, it's
just a time value of money and a
uncertainty question that someone's
willing to take a lower rate. But yeah,
I think I personally I think if you sell
it for 60%, you're probably leaving
money on the table. Just wait a year. I
mean, 40% for a year is a pretty good
return. Should set up a little uh side
hedge fund, a little side pocket.
>> Joe, I'll sell you my ter claims.
>> All right. I I'll maybe we'll do a
little a little trade here and write
about it. Ryan Peterson, thank you so
much. Uh great to catch up with you. I'm
sure there will be more opportunities in
the coming [music] months and years
ahead of all this, but thanks for coming
back on.
>> It was great to be here again. Thank
you.
>> Thanks, Ryan.
[music]
>> Tracy, we should do an episode on the
the new delivery network that's actually
built being built by the Chinese
companies inside the United States. I
didn't know that existed at all. I think
that'd be fascinating. 20% is already as
big as Amazon's logistical network.
That's pretty wild.
>> Well, this is why, you know, I was
asking a few questions about like how
you actually classify items and things
whenever you see this kind of sweeping
rule change. I feel like you get a very
immediate reaction from the people who
are paying it and some of them get
extremely creative if not illegal.
Right. And it's fascinating to look at
some of those solutions.
>> Yeah. No, I like the I it's I mean it
makes obvious sense. It's oh I sell this
thing for $100. I'm going to set up a
company in the US that I sell it to for
a dollar, right?
>> And then the that company sells it for
$100 to, you know, or tries to.
>> That's business.
>> It's also illegal. [laughter] It's
business. But the fact that you see it's
like that it shows up in the data,
right? That there's like all that a
foreign company can theoretically apply
for the refund and etc. or could
establish what was the importer of
>> record that it can a foreign company can
establish itself as the importer of
record and that it shows up in the data
like that shows how much uh creativity
was underway [clears throat] since
liberation day.
>> I mean just from a broader macro
perspective and I know that wasn't the
focus of this episode but maybe we'll do
one at some point. It is going to be
really fascinating to see what refund
recipients actually do with that money,
right? I feel like if you're a corporate
analyst at the moment or if you're an
investor, like it's going to tell you a
lot about the direction of that
particular company, what they do with
that money.
>> I think a big question is just going to
be how many announced sales or something
cuz like there's going to be some
pressure to refund money to consumers,
right? And it'll be interesting to see
if any do some sort of nominal rebate of
some sort. I mean, obviously they're not
legally obliged to, but you know, I
think a lot of people it's going to
really annoy people if especially if
there are categories where it's obvious
that consumer prices went up because of
the tariffs or if companies in some
cases may have, oh, we're putting a
tariff sir charge on you, right? And
they might have spelled it out on some
sort of bill.
>> Well, they probably did because they
don't want to be seen to be raising
prices.
>> So, if you were the type of company
that's like, look, we weren't raising we
didn't want to raise prices. We just
have to we so we're telling you that
part of this $50 that you paid x amount
is a tariff sir charge that we're
applying. They better give you a refund
otherwise that's going to be really
annoying.
>> I guess that other it's like a de facto
windfall for them.
>> Well, you know who handled it pretty
well?
>> Go on.
>> All things considered at this moment in
time. It seems like they handled it
pretty well at Costco cuz I think they
didn't they explicitly said they weren't
going to pass on the tariff charges to
customers. They were just going to like
eat the loss. but also file suit against
the Trump administration. Yeah.
>> Saying the tariffs are illegal. And so
now, you know, they get the refunds.
They don't have to like actually pay
them back to customers, but they don't
take the brand hit from not doing that
because they never charge them anyway.
>> They say they never charge them, but you
know, in theory, they could have held a
price steady and maybe in a in the
alternate universe, the prices would
have come down, right? So,
>> sure. We'll see. At least from I'm
saying from a PR perspective, it was a
good play.
>> Yeah. Yeah, totally.
>> I'm only saying that because I'm a big
fan of the um giant Spanish hams that
you can get at at Costco,
>> which were presumably tiff.
>> I I guess, but I This is the first year
I ever bought a Costco ham, so I can't
tell you.
>> It was so good. I can't tell you what it
was the year before if it actually went
up. But
>> can I tell if a little life hack for the
people that are still listening to the
very end of the conversation? If you
ever like show up at a party and you
bring a Spanish ham, you people will
just love you. And like, you know,
they're a couple hundred dollars or
whatever, but there's a lot of food in
the Spanish ham. And if you're the guy
who shows up at a party with a big
Spanish ham on the whole on the spit or
whatever it is, like that, you're be the
life of the party. It is a very strong
move. A friend of mine did that and
everyone loved him.
>> I think that's an excellent idea. I
bought my husband one for Christmas and
I will say I think it lasted us like a
good three and we ate a lot of hats. You
just leave it out there, right? Like you
just Yeah, there's They preserve very
well.
>> Some cheese and ham for dinner for like
3 weeks.
>> You just keep carving at it. Yeah, it's
Yeah, it actually is.
>> All right, shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> Okay, this has been another episode of
the All Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway. You can follow me at Tracy
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest
Ryan Peterson. He's at typesfast. Follow
our producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Armen. Dash o Bennett at Dashbot and
Kale Brooks at Kalebrooks. And for more
OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlotss.
We have a daily newsletter and all of
our episodes. And you can chat about all
of these things 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
[music]
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we talk about Spanish hams and the
tariffs, then please leave us a positive
review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, [music] you can
listen to all of our episodes absolutely
adree. All you need to do is find the
Bloomberg channel on Apple Podcast and
follow the instructions there. Thanks
for listening.
[music]